                    _   __  ___ _____ ___   _   _   ___  
                   | | / / / _ \_   _/ _ \ | \ | | / _ \ 
                   | |/ / / /_\ \| |/ /_\ \|  \| |/ /_\ \
                   |    \ |  _  || ||  _  ||     ||  _  |
                   | |\  \| | | || || | | || |\  || | | |
                   \_| \_/\_| |_/\_/\_| |_/\_| \_/\_| |_/ 
                             by Joshua Bourgeot
                                  8-07-2021    
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

1. Introduction

    Katana is a simple arcade-ish roguelike I wrote over a few months in my 
junior year of high school. The idea was to finally finish a game and make it
really polished. Most of my projects up until then had been given up on or
felt more like demos than games. To that end, I decided to come up with a  
relatively simple idea for a game and make sure I saw it through to completion.
Thus Katana was born. The overarching ideas governing the game are: arcade-ish
roguelike, non-direct movement, and a high level of polish. The first point is
show by Katana's procedurally generated map and katanas, permedeath, and score
system. The second point comes through with movement being selected by type
(e.g. strike) rather then a specific direction. Finally the game has nice 
features like saving and loading which give it a bit of polish. Katana was a
really fun game to work on, and I hope those who play it enjoy it at least a
little bit.

2. So What Is Going On?

    Katana is a high score game. You will die eventually no matter what, but
hopefully you can kill a fair bit of monsters before you finally bite the dust.
It is also a roguelike (well probably a roguelite), so its map is made up of 
ASCII characters, with the @ symbol representing the player, letters
representing monsters, and other characters representing the terrain. You start 
with four katanas at your disposal, each with their own type, attack damage, 
and movement type. Selecting a katana while next to an monster will attack it, 
while selecting one when no monsters are present will cause you to move based 
on the movement type. When you kill a monster your score is increased 
proportionally to the difficulty of the monster, and when the monsters bring 
your health down to zero the game ends and your score is recorded. Each katana 
has a specific type (e.g. fire). Different types of katanas work better on 
different types of terrain, and different monsters are resistant to different 
katanas. For example, a ice katana (+) works better on water (~), but worse 
against fluid type monsters (f). Thus the game becomes a series of puzzles 
about which katana will work best in each situation. To make things more 
interesting katanas will dull over time, lessening in attack damage. To 
compensate, katanas will periodicity fall from the sky. When a player steps on 
one of these, they can pick it up and replace one of their less effective 
katanas. Finally there are several katana combos in each game, which will do 
things like double the damage of your next attack or give a small health boost.

3. Quick Start

        Launch Katana and select 'New Game'. Hit enter to give your character a
    random name and start the game.

        Most of you katanas probably won't do anything as there are no monsters
    present, however select one a few times until the first wave starts
    and one or more monsters appear. To select a katana press the 'u', 'i',
    'j', or 'k' keys (with default keybindings) to select the top-left, 
    top-right, bottom-left, or bottom-right katana respectively.
    
        When you see a monster appear, press the ';' to view the nearest
    monsters health and level. As this is the first wave, both numbers should
    be relatively low. 

        Now try to move over to the monster by selecting a katana with the 
    Strike or Berserk movement types. If you do not have katanas with those 
    movement types, select a different one and wait for the monster to come to 
    you. Different monsters move at different speeds, so a other monsters may 
    catch up.

        Once the monster is in a tile next to you, select one of you katanas
    to attack it. You will notice the purple bar between the map and katanas,
    go down (or disappear completely if you kill the monster in one hit). This 
    bar represents the health of the monster you are attacking. The red bar to 
    the left of the purple one represents your health. If this one disappears
    completely, you die and the game is over. You will regenerate health when
    not in combat, but it is important to keep this one as full as possible.
    If you are using a katana with a retreat movement type, you may have 
    noticed the katana swishes to movement instead of attacking after two 
    consecutive uses. This is to ensure that you can retreat in the middle of
    a fight.

        After you have killed a few monsters, you can try to start to be more 
    strategic about your katana usage. Pressing the 'h' key will show the quick
    help screen. This screen shows which monsters are resistant to which katanas
    and which katanas work better on what terrain. To see the type of each 
    katana check the symbols in the corners of the katana boxes. For the next 
    monster you attack try to make sure you use a katana the monster is not 
    resistant to, to do max damage. You can always check how much damage you do 
    by using the ';' before and after an attack. Once you have killed that 
    monster, try moving to terrain which will give one or more of your katanas 
    a boost. Being strategic about your katana usage is not super useful in the 
    first few waves, but becomes vital to stay alive later.

        Once you have defeated the first wave, you can check player data by 
    pressing the '@" key. This will show you the name of your character in 
    blue, your score in purple, and your health and current turn in red. The
    terrain of the tile you are standing on is also shown between the 
    parenthesis. Both your score and turn values should be below or around 100,
    but as you fight more waves, both of these will go up. Be warned, the higher
    your turn value, the more each monster kill will increase your score, but 
    each monster will also be of a higher level and thus more powerful. 

        After you fight through the second wave, press shift + one of the katana
    selection keys (u, i, j, k) to view in depth information about that katana.
    The most important value to pay attention to here is the sharpness value.
    As you attack more and more with a katana, its sharpness value will go down.
    A katanas damage is proportional to its sharpness, so a katana which would
    normally do 7 damage at 100 sharpness would only do 3-4 damage at 50 
    sharpness. This screen also shows info on the katana type, katana usage 
    statistics, and a cool ascii art depiction of the katana.

        By now, a katana should have fallen from the sky and landed somewhere 
    on the map. If not, keep playing until one does. The upper-left katana 
    should always start as a fallen katana, so use it to move onto the nearest 
    fallen katana. Once you step on it, a menu will pop up showing in depth 
    information on the fallen katana. If the katana is better then one of the 
    ones you have (or just more sharp) you can replace it by pressing the 
    corresponding key. If you want to keep all of your current katanas, simply 
    press 'b' to break the katana and extract some health from it. 

        The last thing to do is to check the combo screen by pressing the 'c' 
    key. Unless you stumbled upon a combo while playing, the only known one 
    should be the discover combo. Activating this combo, (by pressing the keys 
    shown in order) will "discover" a new combo which can be viewed by 
    returning to the combo screen. Different games will have a few different 
    combos, each of which do wildly different things, so make sure to 
    experiment.

        And thats all there is to know. Keep playing and eventually you will be 
    able to get some very high scores. More in-depth info can be found by 
    browsing the source code or reading the reference later in this manuel. 
    Have fun :-)

4. Compiling

    Should compile on any platform with GCC compiler and ncurses (PDCurses on 
Windows). For example: "gcc katana.c -lm -Wall -Wextra -Wpedantic -okatana 
-lpdcurses". The only thing which you might need to tweak are the keybindings 
(lines 23-51 in Katana.h) and the ncurses include (line 20 in Katana.c). Tested 
on Windows with PDCurses and Migwin.

5. Reference

        This reference includes a more in-depth explanation of aspects of the 
    game. It is not necessary to play the game, however may be helpfully for 
    hardcore players. Stuff between the `` represents code taken from the 
    source. 

    
    Katana Gen:
        Katana's are generated with a random katana, movement type and
    attack damage `(dice(3, 4))` 
        ^which is clamped to 1-12
    attack damage mod `(fmax(dice(4,3) - 6, 0) + ((int) (currentGameData.turn/
    TURNS_UNTIL_KATANA_POWER_INCREASE)))`
        ^which is clamped to 0-12.
    Additionally, a random ASCII representation of the katana is generated.

    Enemy Gen:
        Enemies are generated with a random type. They also have
    level `(dice(((int) currentGameData.turn/TURNS_UNTIL_DIFFICULTY_INCREASE) + 
    1, 4) + 1)`
        ^which is clamped to 1-25 
    speed `(abs(dice(3, 4) - 6))`
        ^which is clamped to 1-6
    max health `((myRand(currentEnemy->level) + 1) * 2)`
        ^which is not clamped
    damage `(currentEnemy->level / (myRand(3) + 1))`
        ^which is not clamped

    Katana damage:
        `double damage = ((double) (katana->damage + myRand(katana->damageMod)) 
        * resistancePercent * synergyPercent) 
        * ((double) katana->sharpness / 100.0);`

    Katana sharpness:
        Katana sharpness decreases by `katana->sharpness -= 
    (chanceForSharpnessDecrease - (CHANCE_FOR_SHARPNESS_DECREASE/2))` every 
    attack. It is clamped at 25-100.

    Katana Types:
        Fire        (*)  - Works better on Magma
        Ice         (+)  - Works better on Water
        Wind        (=)  - Works better on Rock
        Stone       (o)  - Works better on Rock
        Lightning   (^)  - Works better on Magma
        Poison      (~)  - Works better on Water

        When a katana is used on terrain it works better with, its damage is 
        multiplied by 1.3.

    Movement Types:
        Strike  - Move to strongest enemy                        
        Berserk - Move to the closest enemy                      
        Retreat - Move away from the most enemies                
        Return  - Attempt to move to terrain matching katana type
        Defend  - Don't move                                     
        Fallen  - Attempt to move to closest fallen katana       
        Random  - Move in random direction  

    Enemy Types:
        Basic    (B) - No resistances
        Energy   (E) - Resistant to Fire and Lightning
        Strong   (S) - Resistant to Wind and Stone
        Fluid    (F) - Resistant to Ice and Poison

        When an enemy is attacked by a katana it is resistant to, the damage it 
    would take is multiplied by 0.7.

    Terrain Types:
        Grass   (.)
        Water   (~)
        Rock    (*)
        Magma   (^)

    Combos:
        Discover   -  Discover a combo
        Heal       -  Gives a small health boost"
        Terraform  -  Randomly changes the terrain under your feet
        Freeze     -  Freezes all enemies for six turns
        Swap       -  Randomly swaps the location of two katanas
        Boost      -  Double the damage of your next attack
        Teleport   -  Teleport to a random location
        Force      -  Force your next attack to ignore enemy resistance
        Scare      -  Scare enemies into taking a step back

        Every game includes the discover combo plus 2-4 addition combos.

    Fallen katanas:
        Fallen katana have a 1/120 of "falling" every turn. Each one modifies a 
    randomly sized circle of terrain under them. A max of 15 fallen katanas can 
    exist in a game at a time.

    Waves:
        Enemies spawn in waves. Every enemy must be killed before the next wave 
    starts. Each wave has four features which dictate what, where, and when 
    enemies will spawn.

        Enemies can spawn
            All at once
            One at a time
            Two at a time
            A random amount at a time

        There can be
            One type
            Two types
            Three types
            All types

        They will spawn with a
            2 turn delay
            5 turn delay 
            7 turn delay
            10 turn delay
    
        They can spawn from
            One side    
            Two sides  
            Three sides
            All sides  


6. Notes

    *The source code inhabits only two files. I know. This is stupid and a bad 
    idea. I modeled the source format off of Chimaera (the 2002 adventure game) 
    because it looked cool. Sorry.

    *This game is really unbalanced and super luck based. Yes. I only know so 
    many people who are willing to play-test a game like this. You are welcome 
    to change the macros on lines 85 and onward in Katana.h to change the game 
    balance. 